#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Hierarchical Clustering
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Yixin Lin, Glizela Taino
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
May 23, 2016
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For our lab, we want to develop the most efficient way to group data based
 based on a measure of dissimilarity.
 We explored the topic of Hierarchical Clustering which is used in data
 mining and statistics and is used to construct a dendogram to visualize
 the organization and relationship among clusters.
 Hierarchical Clustering can be implemented in two ways: divisive and agglomerat
ive.
 We will elaborate on these two variants in this paper to compare the it's
 algorithmic complexity, or how much time and storage is needed when computed.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Divisive
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Divise clustering is also known as a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

top down
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 method.
 This takes in a data set as one large cluster.
 Then as it moves down the hierarchy, it recusively splits until it reaches
 the leaves of the tree, or each observation is it's own cluster.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Agglomerative
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Agglomerative clustering can be thought to do the opposite of Divisive Clusterin
g and is known as a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

bottom up
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 strategy.
 It takes in a data set and it initially looks at each observation as its
 own singleton cluster.
 Then, based on its similarity measure, it will union recursively to form
 new clusters everytime until all the data is in one cluster.
 The dendrogram is used to record and visiualize of each cluster merge.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Our Implementation
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
