#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Wavelet Density Estimatior Optimization
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Yixin Lin, Glizela Taino, Mark Moyou, and Dr.
 Adrian Peter
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The Wavelet Density Estimation is a toolbox created by Dr.
 Adrian M.
 Peter and Dr.
 Anand Rangarajan [CITATION].
 It estimates probabilty density functions of sample data whose function
 are unknown.
 It does this by using Wavelets which are the basis function for the squared
 finite integrable function space.
 It's used in applications such as 1D, 2D, and 3D shape matching.
 The coefficients that are used to scale the basis functions act as feature
 representations for the shapes.
 These feature representations are constrained to one which conviniently
 map them onto a unit hypersphere.
 The geometry of the hypersphere can be easily manipulated for shape retrieval,
 in effectively recognizing similar and dissimilar shapes based on distance
 between coefficient vectors.
 The Wavelet Density Estimator is essential in extracting shape densities
 as features representations for various shapes.
 Densities have proven to be a distinct representation for various non rigid
 shapes according to (SOME RESEARCH PAPER THAT SHOWS DENSITIES ARE GOOD
 REPRESENTATIONS) [CITIATION].
 There are a lot of computation involved in predicting the densities for
 a sample point set and the code is designed to execute necessary computation.
 However, the issue with this code is the time it takes to process large
 databases.
 Databases such as Brown, Sweedish Leaf, and MPEG7 have 99, 1125, an 1400
 shapes, respectively, and can take _________ amount of time to process
 per shape with a relatievly low resolution.
 Most of the time is spent in two functions that calcualte the initial estimated
 coefficients and the negative likelihood with ________ amount of time on
 average per shape.
 This is due to the design and structure of implenetation.
 The code is designed to perform superfluous and redundant computations
 to solve for basis functions for every sample point individually, when
 in fact the computation returns a value of zero when the sample point falls
 out of the wavelet's support.
 And when calculating the negative loglikelihood the code performs the same
 computation to find the basis functions for every sample point and implements
 a different equation for the cost and gradient.
 As a solution to this probem we only calculated the wavelet basis function
 for relevant sample points under specified basis funcitons.
 This cuts computation and time considerablly to ________, respecitvly.
 We would save these values per point and pass it along in calculating the
 negative loglikelihood.
 This eliminates _______ lines of code from that function and cuts run time
 down to _________ per shape.
 After implementing optimization, the it takes _________.
 As wavelet density coeffients prove to be distinctly representative of
 their shape and can be useful in shape retrieval, the computational time
 to extract these coefficients become ever more important.
 If we wish to see timely growth in this area of research, _____ hours for
 a database of _____ shapes will not help in achieving this outlook.
 And if we wish to see wavelet density coefficiets used more commonly as
 representation, the wavelet density estimator must work more efficiently.
 In this report we will get a basic understanding of wavelets, how it's
 used in density estimation, and why it makes a good feature representation.
 Then we will delve into the code to expand its inefficiency, explain our
 solution to the problem, and lastly we will go over the results of the
 optimization.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Wavelet Density Estimation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In order to create our feature representation we have to estimate the probabilit
y density function of sample points that make up a shape.
 Wavelets act as the basis function of the function space 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

.
 An 
\begin_inset Formula $L^{2}$
\end_inset

 function is a function that consists of real numbers that is squared integrable
, or finite.
 Probabilty density functions fall under this function space, therefore
 allowing us to use wavelets for density estimation using a linear combination
 of these basis functions.
 The equation for 1D density estimation is 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
p(x)=\underset{j_{o},k}{\sum}\alpha_{j_{o},k}\phi_{j_{o},k}(x)+\underset{j\geq j_{o},k}{\overset{j_{1}}{\sum}}\beta_{j,k}\psi_{j,k}(x)
\]

\end_inset

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\phi(x)$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\psi(x)$
\end_inset

 are the scaling and wavelet basis functions, also known as the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

father
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

mother
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 wavelets, respectively.
 The functions can also be set to some starting resolution level that determines
 its dialation and contraction.
 To extend to multiresolutions, we incorporate the wavelet basis function
 with a starting, 
\begin_inset Formula $j_{o}$
\end_inset

, and stopping, 
\begin_inset Formula $j$
\end_inset

, resolution level.
 In order to form a basis, we need to make multiple copies of the function
 over different translates, 
\begin_inset Formula $k$
\end_inset

.
 These functions are scaled by their scaling and wavelet basis function
 coefficients, 
\begin_inset Formula $\alpha_{j_{o},k}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta_{j,k}$
\end_inset

.
 To retain prorties of true denities, such as non-negativety and should
 integrate to one, we compute the squareroot of the probabilty density function
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\sqrt{p(x)}=\underset{j_{o},k}{\sum}\alpha_{j_{o},k}\phi_{j_{o},k}(x)+\underset{j\geq j_{o},k}{\overset{j_{1}}{\sum}}\beta_{j,k}\psi_{j,k}(x)
\]

\end_inset

Since we optimized for multiresolution 2D wavelet density estimation, we
 consider the second dimension with 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{x}=(x_{1},x_{2})$
\end_inset

 and 
\series bold

\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{k}=(k_{1},k_{2})$
\end_inset


\series default
.
 We also extend the equation to 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\sqrt{p(\mathbf{x})}=\underset{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}{\sum}\alpha_{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}\phi_{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}(\mathbf{x})+\underset{j\geq j_{o},\mathbf{k}}{\overset{j_{1}}{\sum}}\overset{3}{\underset{w=1}{\sum}}\beta_{j,\mathbf{k}}^{w}\psi_{j,\mathbf{k}}^{w}(\mathbf{x})
\]

\end_inset

where we calculate for the basis functions by using the tensor product method
 
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\phi_{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}(\mathbf{x})=2^{j_{o}}\phi(2^{j_{o}}x_{1}-k_{1})\phi(2^{j_{o}}x_{2}-k_{2})
\]

\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\psi_{j,\mathbf{k}}^{1}(\mathbf{x})=2^{j}\phi(2^{j}x_{1}-k_{1})\psi(2^{j}x_{2}-k_{2})
\]

\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\psi_{j,\mathbf{k}}^{2}(\mathbf{x})=2^{j}\psi(2^{j}x_{1}-k_{1})\phi(2^{j}x_{2}-k_{2})
\]

\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\psi_{j,\mathbf{k}}^{3}(\mathbf{x})=2^{j}\psi(2^{j}x_{1}-k_{1})\psi(2^{j}x_{2}-k_{2})
\]

\end_inset

Intuitively, the scaling and wavelet basis function coefficients determine
 the height of its basis function.
 Therefore, our goal is to obtain the coefficients that uniquely define
 the probabilty denisty function of a shape and use as a feature representation
 in shape retrieval.
 In order to calculate coefficients we perform the follow equations
\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\alpha_{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}=\bigg(\frac{1}{N}\bigg)\overset{N}{\underset{i=1}{\sum}}\frac{\phi_{j_{o},\mathbf{k}}(\mathbf{x})}{\sqrt{p(\mathbf{x})}}
\]

\end_inset


\begin_inset Formula 
\[
\beta_{j_{o},k}=\bigg(\frac{1}{N}\bigg)\underset{i=1}{\overset{N}{\sum}}\frac{\psi_{j,\mathbf{k}(\mathbf{x})}}{\sqrt{p(\mathbf{x})}}
\]

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
